Are you paying attention?
Perhaps you've been asked that question by your parents, a teacher, or someone else in authority.
It's a good question for each of us to ask ourselves.
Can you think of occasions associated with our worship that require us to pay special attention?
For example, when reading the Bible, attending meetings, elders when shepherding.
You children when being instructed by your parents.
We want to pay attention, and yet there are so many distractions.
Electronic gadgets, the conversations and activities of those around us.
Truly, it can be a challenge to pay attention.
Did you know that the phrase pay attention occurs dozens of times in the New World Translation?
In many of those occurrences, Jehovah is instructing his people to pay attention.
What does it mean to pay attention?
And how important is it that you and I pay attention to Jehovah?
The account in 1 Samuel chapter 15 will help us to answer those questions.
In verse 3, Jehovah instructs King Saul to strike down the Amalakites and to devote them and everything they have to destruction.
However, verses 8 and 9 tell us that Saul did not obey.
He spared the King of Amalak and the best of the animals.
How did Saul respond when Samuel confronted him?
As we read verses 13 through 15, note how Saul tried to justify his disobedience.
When Samuel finally came to him, Saul said to him,
May Jehovah bless you.
I have carried out the word of Jehovah.
That Samuel said,
Then what is this sound of the flock in my ears and the sound of the cattle that I hear?
To this Saul said,
they were brought from the Amalakites because the people spared the best of the flock and the herd for sacrificing them to Jehovah, your God.
But what was left, we devoted to destruction.
Did you notice?
Saul attempted to justify his disobedience, claiming that the animals would be sacrificed to Jehovah.
Was Jehovah pleased with Saul?
As we read verse 22, please note the connection between paying attention and obedience.
Samuel then said,
Does Jehovah take as much pleasure in bird offerings and sacrifices as in obeying the voice of Jehovah?
Look, to obey is better than a sacrifice and to pay attention than the fat of grams.
What was one of the causes of Saul's disobedience?
He didn't pay attention to Jehovah's instructions.
His failure to pay attention resulted in disobedience and brought Jehovah's disapproval.
What a powerful lesson for us.
As happened with Saul, our worship could become unacceptable to Jehovah if we fail to pay attention.
Now that we understand why it is important to pay attention,
let's consider three aspects of paying attention that are discussed in the Bible.
The first scripture will consider is 2 Chronicles chapter 19, verse 6.
And he, that is, Jehoshaphat, said to the judges,
Pay attention to what you are doing for you to not judge for man, but for Jehovah.
And he is with you when you pass judgment.
This admonition to pay attention was given by King Jehoshaphat
to appoint a judge throughout the land of Judah.
What a sobering reminder.
Those judges had good reason to pay attention to what they were doing.
Why? They were responsible to Jehovah.
They represented him, and their decisions affected the lives of fellow worshippers.
Thus, they needed to be familiar with Jehovah's thinking on matters
and to hold to his unprejudiced viewpoint when handling matters.
This is an excellent reminder for those who serve as elders.
Good elders are good students of the Bible and Bible-based publications.
Why? Their attentiveness to Jehovah enables them to pay attention to what they are doing.
If they are going to represent Jehovah and reflect his thinking accurately as they handle matters,
whether they are shepherding the congregation, delivering a part at a meeting,
caring for a challenging assignment, or addressing wrongdoing,
they must pay attention to what they are doing.
That is why they must be familiar with Jehovah's thinking,
and then take care to follow his direction.
If they do, they show that they are paying attention to what they are doing.
Jehovah's interest in assisting the elders is demonstrated in the ongoing education he provides.
Each time the circuit overseer visits the congregation, he presents material prepared especially for the elders.
The King to Ministry School and the School for Congregation Elders provide more intensive instruction.
How important that elders pay close attention to and apply such instruction.
They are doing so protect not just themselves, but also fellow worshippers.
By paying attention, elders will be able to convey direction to the congregations accurately.
This can be especially important if our worship is banned or restricted in the event of a natural disaster or other catastrophic event.
This brings us to the second aspect of paying attention that we'll consider.
Let's read Luke chapter 8, verse 18.
Therefore, pay attention to how you listen for whoever has will be given more.
But whoever does not have even what he imagines he has will be taken away from him.
What did Jesus mean when he said, pay attention to how you listen?
Those in Jesus' audience in the first century had the wonderful privilege of hearing Jesus' literal voice as he instructed them.
Of course, we can't hear the voice of Jesus today, but we can read his words and learn of his actions as revealed in the gospel accounts.
In fact, we have many opportunities to listen.
To Jehovah, Jesus, the faithful and discreet slave, the elders in our congregation, our marriagemate, our children.
Note wonder the Bible writer James stated that everyone must be quick to listen.
Think about it.
If Saul had truly listened receptively to Jehovah's direction regarding the Amalakites, he would likely have grasped the importance of the direction he received and would have been motivated to obey.
However, his lack of attentiveness led to disobedience and Jehovah's disapproval.
If we don't pay attention to how we listen, we could find ourselves becoming critical or unappreciative or even disobedient.
So as Jehovah instructs and directs us, we need to think about what we are being told, ponder over its meaning, mallet over in our mind, and most important, apply the instruction in our own lives.
If you're a young person, how can you show that you're paying attention to how you listen?
Consider the admonition in Ephesians chapter 6 verses 1 through 3.
Children, be obedient to your parents and union with the Lord, for this is righteous.
On her, your father and your mother, is the first command with the promise that it may go well with you, and you may remain a long ta'ah on the earth.
You children, who do you think is the source of this direction?
We know that these words come from Jehovah.
Did you notice that the verses state not only that children should be obedient to their parents, but also that they should honor their parents?
How can you show that you're paying attention to how you listen to this direction?
When I was a boy, I can remember occasions when my parents would ask me to do something, perhaps to take out the trash.
I would always obey, but at times I'd make it very clear that I didn't really want to do what was asked.
I think you young ones know what I mean.
However, if we're truly paying attention to how we listen to Jehovah's words, we'll be careful to honor our parents, which is an essential element of obedience.
In this way, we contribute to the peace of the family, and we make Jehovah's heart glad.
Additionally, as the promise in verse 3 indicates, paying attention to how you listen will protect you and contribute to your success in other ways throughout your adult life.
Of course, all of us should remember that our everlasting welfare will depend on our willingness to listen and obey.
How important, then, that all of us pay attention to how we listen.
The third aspect of paying attention is found at Luke chapter 21 verses 34 and 35, but pay attention to yourselves.
That your hearts never become weighed down with overeating and heavy drinking and anxieties of life, and suddenly, that day be instantly upon you as a snare.
When Jesus admonished his followers to pay attention to themselves, he didn't have in mind the selfish thinking that characterized King Saul, and that so common even encouraged in today's world.
Rather, Jesus' words reveal that the key to paying attention to ourselves is knowing ourselves, knowing what's in our figurative heart.
This is a challenge for all of us. Why? The Bible explains in Jeremiah chapter 17 verse 9,
the heart is more treacherous than anything else and is desperate.
Who can know it? Verse 10 answers,
I Jehovah am searching the heart, examining the innermost thoughts.
So Jehovah knows what is in our heart, and he can help us to know.
He can help us to examine our motives and goal holds, and to discern why we do certain things.
Carefully and honestly, looking at ourselves in the mirror of God's word can reveal areas in our thinking, words, and actions that need attention.
For example, some of Jehovah's people, including those of retirement age who enjoyed very comfortable circumstances, have concluded that they needed to make adjustments in their lifestyle, simplifying their lives,
so that they can serve Jehovah more fully.
Some who have done so have had the privilege of attending the school for kingdom evangelizers.
Although it meant stepping out of their comfort zone, perhaps moving to a new congregation, they've experienced Jehovah's blessing in ways they couldn't have anticipated,
as they share the benefits of their experience and theocratic education in their new assignments.
How grateful we are that Jehovah is providing ongoing life-saving instruction by means of his word and organization.
May each of us be determined to pay attention to what we are doing, to how we listen, and to ourselves.
By doing so, we'll avoid falling into the trap of disobedience, as King Saul did.
Instead, as attentive and obedient surface, we'll enjoy Jehovah's friendship forever.